So, welcome, welcome. Again, just rejoicing that once again, we're all here, and as usual,
just to really set with our three noble, vital motivations of the entirety of our practice
and our path, we'll just take a few moments to again reconnect with our joy, our appreciation,
vastness, Bodhichitta, with the wish, sincere, based on the Four Boundless, that all of our
activities in this next hour, in this day, in this life, in the boundless lives can only
be of benefit for infinite beings. And then also with that great confidence and purity
view of devotion to the basic essential goodness and perfection of this place and time, teaching
everything, keep that three vajra awareness to the best of our abilities.
So even with these basic motivations, I'm kind of continuing a little bit from last week
where we're kind of reflecting on karma, and especially within the context of these four
thoughts that turn the mind. We've reflected, of course, on the preciousness of this human
birth, impermanence, the defects of samsara. And then last week we were kind of reviewing
a little bit, touching on karma, and kind of went into the 12 links. So we're going
to review that a little bit again. And just to karma, the natural law of cause and effect,
that's so all-pervading, so beautiful, this profound lion's roar of the Buddha's teachings.
And even with these basic motivations we have, we can just see how karma, meaning, it affects
this moment, our motivation. But even in reflecting on this precious opportunity we have right
now to even hear the dharma, not to mention contemplate it, and awaken it in our own experience
and heart, and undo our samsara, and bring out our goodness qualities for the benefit
of all beings. That too, like our great teacher says, it's in no way co-accidental. It's not
random, that's equally just a part of our good karma. And as well as the power of this
aspiration of bodhicitta, when we're really sincerely connecting with our bodhicitta motivation,
and that's the base for all of our activities. That's so powerful, that's uprooting samsara
from its base. Like I mentioned last week in this sasum linkpa refuge, "O Mahum," I take
refuge in the three jewels in order to shake up samsara, I generate bodhicitta. That is
also using this current fortunate circumstances to just increase its power and use all that
is ripening for us, this moment to expand and purify into a more and more natural authentic
state which means it also will be of benefit for others. And then of course our purity
motivation, our devotion, so profound that deeper trust in the basic nature which needs
to be based on experience, and yet all the experiences we have again are the results
of our past actions and the motivations and mindsets that we were experiencing in that
moment, and that we choose now to either not engage with or to engage with to bring our
future. And then along with this great vastness bodhicitta, that devotion especially to the
pure realization of our precious teacher, of the guru yoga and mingling our mind with
the pure direct perception of the guru, so profound in that pure view and that pure realization.
So anyway, just that, reflecting on that for myself. I don't know if people had a chance
to check your emails yet but I mentioned last week I went over these 12 links of interdependent
origination, co-origination, but I was able to send that a little bit ago so if you have
that you could look in your email and I thought maybe we'll just kind of review this again
having a little visual. And if you were with us last week hopefully you can kind of recall
a little bit of that and it was benefited, if not I think this is recorded so there's
a lot maybe I don't need to go over since we have the magic of the recording but we
want to be able to remember these things for ourselves, right? So we'll just jump right
in, we'll just review these links to kind of have a framework to then continue our discussion
a little bit and of course lama drop if you have anything to note or add please it's fine.
So if you have this, if you don't, I'm going to say these 12 links in case you don't, if
you do you have it here. So this is from this really wonderful book by Reginald Ray that
he prepared I think for some of his classes at Nalanda called the Indestructible Truth
which is introducing you know the three turnings and the three vehicles of Tibetan Buddhism
and kind of giving a really good foundation of these foundational teachings and views
and practices and in that in his discussion of the three turnings in the first turning
teaching he goes over among other things these 12 nidanas or the 12 links of interdependent
co-origination meaning again our way the Buddha gave us to look at our present experience.
And again remembering the four noble truths samsara suffering it has causes ignorance anger
attachment ego clinging ignorance and negative emotions are the causes of samsara and then
of course there's cessation of suffering and the path of undoing revealing the beautiful
peace of nirvana or cessation. So these 12 links are you know what's called again the
wheel of life often like you can see in Padmasamyaling if you've been here in the entry hallway
shows the wheel of life which is very traditional in all the the Buddhist monasteries at the
center it shows the three animals a pig a rooster a snake that are all kind of attached
to each other and those are representing really the fundamental cause of suffering of samsara
of all the six realms experiences of beings is the basic ignorance and then aggression
and and you know aversion and and attachment and craving all the actions that stem out
from those three poisons to the five poisons and unfolding actions based on them causing
some sara right cause plus conditions has results and the results of our present experience
are based on our past actions our past past states of mind the conditions that were arriving
then how we engage with them creating a future moment that then becomes a present moment
and that keeps perpetuating itself and these often what we experience happens it's like
a blur it's totally it is a magic trick an amazing web of illusion right of interdependence
which functions perfectly and yet all based on emptiness the great emptiness without the
great openness and emptiness of inherent existence none of this perfection of relative you know
causation cause and effect could function so the buddhist pointing out again these twelve
links are in a way of for our our minds to begin to look at what all seems like it might
be a moment unexamined or where we're totally caught up in our circumstances including our
outlook and our way of responding totally caught up in our emotions this is a way of
starting to break them down and look at just the mechanics of it and then of course with
practice seeing how to begin to stop it so these twelve links will say them again the
beginning here it has this wheel the first and it has both the Sanskrit terms and the
English terms so for simplicity now I'm just going to really refer to that English terms
so the second one in here ignorance the next going clockwise karmic formations the next
third consciousness for name and form five six senses six contact seven feeling eight
craving nine grasping ten becoming eleven birth twelve decay death so this is kind of
like the wheel that's spinning what's making this whole wheel the energy that makes helps
this whole wheel spin is our ignorance this is it you know definitely can chip all that
appreciate pointed out in kimpo say won't kind of use that metaphor it's like a fan
ignorance is like the electricity making the fan turn the more we can cut down our ignorance
our fundamental not knowing of like the four noble truths of not knowing the true nature
of our own mind the more we can increase that familiarity and perception the more these links
will pass down which includes having at least beginning to have an intellectual understanding
of this map so we have causes and results so another way that this is broken down is
there's cause and effect right every cause when the conditions come together for the
cause or the seed when that's in the right conditions brings a result and then that results
can then based on within those conditions of that result our actions within that context
create causes for future results and on and on and on so sometimes again this is referred
to can be looked at as lifetime to lifetime but I think right lifetime to lifetime is
totally based on every moment that we have so this is also understanding every instantaneous
moment of our our experience and if you look here in in the very center of this wheel has
past present future so these first two ignorance and karmic four nations are in a way for this
present moment our past this present moment is where both we're experiencing the effects
of our past actions and habitual tendencies and patterns we're experiencing their ripening
and then we're engaging with them and that all in the present moment so that's consciousness
through becoming and then based on those everything that's arising in our circumstances in this
moment inner outer and how we engage that is making seeds for a future experience unlike
we've heard in the past even in nature right when the right when a seed is born when a
seed is planted it's going to create even more you know fruits than the one seed will
bring many many fruits and inside that many many more seeds which will just be perpetuated
if the conditions are continued all right so going back here ignorance in a way is the
ground for all of our the based on ignorance is happening because we've remained ignorant
of our and to some degree you know right again the only difference between a fully enlightened
Buddha and sentient being is the degree to which we recognize the nature or not so there's
degrees of ignorance of course it's not a black and white thing and that's important
I think for us all to remember as we're just little babes on the path right with these
great role models of those who've fully developed it so there are our ignorance has remained
within the ground of that ignorance means all of our past habits all of the the actions
we've taken in the past have now become causes or seeds that are in the conditions of our
ignorance and that brings us to then this present moment where we have consciousness
naturally a big part of that consciousness is our diluted consciousness all those karmic
habitual patterns that have been planted in our alaya based in our past actions then begin
to naturally sprout forth and then extensions of that those habitual patterns are what then
like in fourth name and form where we begin to have perceptions concepts of in all the
different ways we can label things and a part of that process then extending from that is
then the six senses like we went over last week again all of our our five senses our eye
here nose taste sensation our body conscious our mental consciousness all these six senses
perceptions both from the consciousness side and the objects of our consciousness and the
interface we have with them all those are developing to play out again these habitual
patterns of person in an environment you know beings in their universe etc so our six senses
that habitual pattern is happening of subject object and then and then contact is how when
our consciousness is then meeting you know our our consciousness is meeting the sights
we're seeing the sights we're hearing the sounds smelling the smells tasting the taste
feeling the sensations having the thoughts and again right that sometimes we might that's
a very subtle difference to between those things I mean it's so quick so kind of you know almost
inseparable in a way looking so contact is when the subject object is meeting right feeling
then what's our habitual pattern of how we feel about what we're perceiving whether it's
an outside thing or an inner emotion or thought you know perception is how we're feeling so
all this is the effect of our habitual patterns and there's nothing much we can do about that
nothing at all we can do about that as far as controlling what happens to us or what might come
up for us you know as far as emotions or how we feel about something but often then again we get
caught in the blur of identifying as our emotions or you know feel trapped by our circumstances or
we're so wrapped up in either our hopes or our fears that we we lose this next step and really
important difference between how we feel about something and then craving or thirst is another
of this eighth link is the difference between how we're feeling about something whether it's
whether we feel an attraction to it and it's going to help us and nurture us and give us
comfort and pleasure or if it's something we're totally averse to something scary disruptive
dangerous unpleasant you know unhealthy danger in some in some way or it can even be neutral
things of course there's those basic ways so but the difference between how we feel about these
things and then that really the tipping point between how we feel about it and then if we decide
to really continue the thirst cycle to really take the hook in a way to how if we really there's
like a very subtle thing the buddha said there where there's a difference between how we're
feeling about things and then if we decide to move into that feeling and begin to in a way
try to inhabit that feeling identify with that feeling so that's this eighth link of craving
grasping is again this like almost indistinguishable difference then between when we've decided to
kind of take our own bait and engage with our habitual pattern and inhabit you know our thirst
and then grasping is when we actually make the actions with our mind and our body our speech
to to actually engage and activate you know inhabit in this again in this present moment
like all this that we were experiencing good bad neutral becoming is then another part of
this present moment where the action happens the on whatever level instantaneous to increasing
so that's all this present moment within that the effect is from consciousness
all the echoing out through name form the six senses the objects of the senses making contact
with them how we feel about them is all the effect now the part that's the effect part of
our present moment the cause what creates future karma is then this part of how we engage with
our thirst or our craving which can also here it's not just our craving but it also can be what we
're
we totally reject so just to understand that here in this term craving or thirst mean can also
imply
whatever strong feelings or degree of feeling that we decide to engage with be it aversion or
attachment or desire you know so then craving and grasping are then and then becoming are
creating the full cycle of then creating seeds for the future and then we have the future then
in this sense is what's called on the 12 links birth and then decay and death or early age and
death so birth is just again can be the next moment it can also be and then of course because
things are everything that's interdependent and conditional is subject to impermanence naturally
it's going to decay it's going to fall apart in some way or another and then that leads us into
you know what becomes then the present moment whose past is based on our ignorance and etc
so i hope that's just a little helpful and again there's so many wonderful texts to kind of go
over these 12 links like i mentioned in this indestructible truth also in temple rumpushes
in of course because these are such fundamental teachings um in walking in the footsteps of the
buddha the path of freedom by kenchen paulden shara brimpashe and kenpo se londong brimpashe
it's another wonderful text on these fundamental teachings also goes over the 12 links and karma
of course in the chapter on um in illuminating the path particularly that goes with our nundro
teachings again they go over in the four thoughts karma in ceaseless echoes of great silence again
this commentary on the heart sutra the in the heart sutra of course the the buddha and
it is going through you know all these first turning teachings and bringing in the view
of great emptiness you know so goes so there is a teaching on the 12 links within ceaseless echoes
of great silence i mean there's so many um i think also in uh the buddhist path
or the opening to our pride mordial nature and the causes and conditions of mind rumpushes
really go over in a way these 12 links sorry i didn't turn off my buzzer um
and in that point too they're kind of they're really looking at
this present moment is based on is our past moments and our past actions
and when we begin to follow them back and back and back and back right every present
moment is the result of past actions all those past actions are present moments of the results
of past actions going back and back and back and but where can we find the beginning since
beginningless time so that's why this aspect of looking to the mind the mind you know we have
these three doors through which we create karma the three doors our body our speech our mind
of course it's renowned that while it might seem like we're really subject to the sensations and
things our body feels and the words and you know energy we have but it's really when we look
closely
our mind and how we is how we relate to our body and speech and energy and if we go to look for
mind itself it goes back and back and back and of course no one's found their mind even the buddha
and of course that process is why it's so important like we mentioned last week
our basic practice that encompasses all our practice is the accumulation of merit and wisdom
that means again positive karma is merit when in our present moment
which is so favorable while of course we we all have mixed feelings and habits you know
and ways of perceiving we're still so fortunate this precious human birth with all the favorable
conditions you know and luxuries which are so the the dharma in our mind and heart
and the ability to practice so profound so beautiful so precious this is the result of
our good karma of our merit you know and knowing that can really inspire us to continue
and become more aware again of what's helpful for building you know positivity for ourselves and
others positive karma that means based on you know contentment bodhicitta devotion
actions for boundless aspirations a good heart you know any actions and you know of our body
speech mind with those are going to bring favorable results for our futures and likewise
being aware of what's negative what's harmful you know these classical teachings on the the
ten non-virtues three by body four by speech three by mind you know becoming aware of the
destructive qualities of those and that what animates them again is our our aggression our
aversion our wrong view of reality can skew you know the act all the actions of our body
and misuse of our speech and misuse of our body and those are going to just create more
trouble for ourselves and others and the law of karma is it's really only ourselves that it will
experience the big results of our karma our experiences and that's inevitable you know like
they say like uh you know a body and its shadow i mean there's the you know patram pache talks
about you know it's like our the are all the causes we've made in our past good or bad
we may not see their results right now but when the conditions come together it's like when you
know a bird lands suddenly its shadow will appears likewise so we don't need that can also be
positive
you know so accumulating merit that's what's happening here between feeling and craving
grasping becoming when we're engaging in accumulating merit is how we're using
whatever is arisen for ourselves however we feel about it even neutral turning it with bodhicitta
and pure perception and more contentment and renunciation engaging with it for the positive
that's like this right the bodhicitta practice of joyful effort joyful effort for virtue you know
engaging everything you know with joyful effort with sincere effort that's also what you know
our motivation is what makes our karma more or less powerful how we're feeling about it so
that's happening and then there's all these words and all these things we can
you know listings we can have in this beautiful frame that we can have for the bait for this
moment but again this is something for each one of us to just look and use this tool to kind of
break down what might seem like one continuous solid thing see how it breaks up the difference
between how we feel about what we perceive and how much then we're going to actually
inhabit it in a way you know and that's also why calm abiding meditation is so fundamental
to our insight of the true nature of our bringing out our wisdom if we can learn and train
ourselves
to relax and be undistracted we have a direct experiential
path that again we're creating more of a habitual pattern for just being more aware of the spaces
between you know the parts of our habitual patterns and then as we purify our negativities
and obscurations which again is karmic increase our our meritorious and virtuous activities
you know based on you know the three motivations applying these great supports of our mindfulness
our alertness conscientiousness then we're creating profound we maybe only see that very itsy bitsy
little tip of the iceberg of how beneficial this is for our future lives and for the benefit of all
beings and just like we begin our practice with these powerful motivations and relax with our
main practice engage all you know activate all the paramitas based on our four boundless
do our nundra practice with that devotion reflecting on all the different aspects of our
nundra session always right then we dedicate another one of the great lions roars of the buddha
our aspiration you know dedicating the positive effects of our practice and our actions for the
benefit of all the limitless beings throughout all time but also the power of aspiration you know
just like part of the conditions of our present moment is that our wisdom is limited right now
our capacities are limited right now
but the nature of our mind like rempoche say is infinite and unimpeded
therefore that's why the buddha said it's so important to engage with our aspirations again
our motivation really in a heartfelt way using you know it's our imagination is the only limit
to what we can aspire to and not just waiting till the end of our practice for that aspiration
but in the beginning having those aspirations in the middle having this aspiration and this
closeness feeling allowing ourselves to experience the moment and also you know kind of let our
aspirations draw us towards you know fulfillment but with that we always have to act in accordance
with our capacities what our present abilities are you know and being practical and sensible with
that
so having vast aspiration pure motivation but then being very practical with working with our
present moment just like Gurrenpoche said you know my view is as wide as the sky it's very similar
but my attention to the law of cause and effect is as fine as flower and for these omniscient ones
again this is the skillful means of the great ones they still work with interdependence but
they're not bound by karma you know and due to their great kindness and compassion and the
total fruition of their bodhicitta they're working with interdependence to meet our independence
and give us tools these skillful means vast powerful skillful means practices of the vajjhana
especially here to like purify and develop our bodhicitta so i guess all i'm saying is again
another really point i'm reminding myself is connecting with our motivation so important
no matter what our current abilities are being sensible about what our current abilities are too
and um maybe i'll finish this too with this one person asked a question kristen that kind of
reflects again here to our capacities not only our own capacities but the capacities of others
and really being careful about our actions so um she was saying many people today feel traumatized
and are expressing that more readily almost as part of their identity
since identity isn't fixed but constantly moving and evolving how do we work with or talk with
people who feel or identify with trauma so strongly that they can't see the potential
for evolving past that as identity
how does vajjhana buddhism frame trauma in a way that honors the experience
but also encourages a broader evolving perspective also in a way that doesn't
insult that individual's experience wow that's a very amazingly good rich question
well i think the first thing that comes to my mind is what a little mouse in the grass i am
but yeah we don't we i think the important thing we have to all remember in again trying to be
good practitioners and in actualizing our bodhicitta of really being of benefit for other
beings for other human beings in our lives and being of true help it means again along these
lines of capacities and aspiration we always have to work within our own capacities
we can have really good intentions and we as practitioners might have these you know really
trust in you know karma and the deeper openness of identity and the emptiness of self so to speak
but really i don't think i could give a pat answer to this these questions just in the sense of
everyone is so different and not only do we have to always act in accordance with our
own knowledge and capacities but as bodhisattvas it's very important the teachers are always
reminding us we also need to engage with others according to their readiness and their
desire to want to to do anything you know so it's a tricky question
i think the only way i i would really feel comfortable answering it is saying as far as
practitioners we do the practice we we read we contemplate we practice we really take bodhicitta
to heart which means not only our activities but our our wisdom is increasing how our emptiness
awareness can deepen and become more pervasive and you know full of bringing out the richness
qualities of our buddha buddha nature's love and compassion and wisdom you know as being
responsible
for our own experience as practitioners is kind of more where i'm coming from here
and then of course as we do that then we can be of more help but how to actually kind of answer
this
question as far as how to help others i think that's so relative to each one of our own field
of knowledge and experience and skill and our familiarity with the person involved and their
readiness and their willingness and whatever their experience of life is it's so varied so
beyond being practitioners that's also each one of us as just human beings there's such a thing we
have this wonderful supports of you know different people who do are trained to help with trauma
who
are helped to like unfold and move ourselves out of our rehearsals of distress you know and being
caught in loops of distress you know and that's a very you know tender thing and very careful thing
so i think we if we can direct people towards like a really something they want to do that's
really well equipped to help them just on the relative level even if they're you know buddhist
practitioner or not that's that's there and again just in the sense of openness when we
can move into a situation that we begin can begin to examine and hold what we're experiencing
you know challenges you know traumatic you know ways of you know contracting and being you know
reacting to our present situations and like bringing it back to you know however we want
to define trauma if we really begin to put ourselves into a safe space to explore with
someone who's skillful at helping us navigate that that gives an experiential experience of
that things can change and open you know so again little by little by little
carefully carefully please carefully all of us i'm not really qualified to
give much more advice i think on that plus we're kind of finishing up our time for talking i think
is there any other little points with that i had two points for the 12 links yeah they've really
helped me over the years um in terra vada like foundational buddhism specifically i'm referencing
like going to vipassana um they emphasize there's actually two spots to actually break the cycle of
the 12 links and be free of suffering and the one that's emphasized in terra vada buddhism
is right after feeling link number seven vedna and then the next one is craving tanha so actually
they say when a sense object meets a sense door like we see a thing with our eye when that contact
happens there's literally a physical feeling sensation that moves through our body and that's
actually um the feeling vedna and there's three types of feelings pleasant unpleasant and neutral
and based on our habit pattern we tend to want to keep or crave the pleasant ones push away
the unpleasant ones and we're basically just unaware of the neutral physical sensations
in our body and so that's where we can actually break that link of this cycle into the next
so to actually know there's a physical sensation happening as a result of experiencing an object
and instead of saying i want it i don't want it i don't know we try to recognize the nature
of that physical sensation and in terra vada buddhism the nature of all conditioned phenomena
is impermanent so we're recognizing the impermanent nature of that felt sensation
instead of just trying to cultivate a certain type of experience and that which would just
continue the cycle with craving and then grasping trying to collect it becoming trying to act on it
and so that's one spot um the problem with that is that if we have to wait for all the other links
one through six to form that means we have half the cycle of samsara that has to arise every time
and so that's a longer path um and so the second place to break the 12 links
is taught in Vajrayana and that's before the first link before ignorance or vijja which is
often known as ma rigpa in tibetan that's why the link is broken with rigpa non-ignorance or wisdom
and if the technique is like there's all these techniques if we can recognize a state of non-ignor
ance
or of rigpa then that prevents the ma rigpa or ignorance from happening and then the whole cycle
breaks right there and we don't have to go through the next 12 links of conditioned existence or
suffering we actually break it before the cycle starts and that's why they say there's two paths
a knowing or not knowing and these high high level teachings it's either rigpa or not rigpa
and that's where Vajrayana breaks the cycle of the 12 links and then I ask Rinpoche's well if
you break the cycle of the 12 links does the rest of the cycle continue as pure relative truth
so if you break if you don't have ignorance ma rigpa instead you have rigpa or a knowing
quality of the nature of conditioned existence dependent arising the energy of awareness still
does continue and it arises purely and that's where you get pure body and pure speech in Vajrayana
Buddhism so those two points are really helpful because to know where to actually break the links
either with a physical sensation and then recognizing its impermanent nature that's
Satipatthana sutra that's mindfulness of body actually the Buddha taught in the suttas or sutras
and then all the Vajrayana techniques are based on breaking the link or disrupting the link the
cycle before it starts it before link one yes merit and wisdom
so we'll start our nundra practice thank you